[Music]
thank you very much for being everybody
my name is Sean I'm a public speaker
author an activist out of London I'm
going to talk about the lessons I
learned on my Jail experience can you
imagine what it is like to be facing a
200 year sentence after I graduated from
university I moved to Arizona with the
goal of becoming a millionaire in the
stock market
I never imagined through my own bad
choices I would go so far beyond laws I
would end up in America's deadliest
shale started getting interested in the
stock market at a young age 14 my
economics teacher gave me lessons on my
own show me how the stock markets what
they meant the numbers in the financial
times at 16 or at 50 pounds off my nan
double didn't be teachers so normal
mates in my little town when I go to
America
make a million fly you guys over that
was my dream so after so after after
graduating I got work as a stockbroker
in Arizona in the beginning I wasn't
making much money but five years in I
was the top guy in the office grossing
half a million a year got my own staff
secretary cold callers but I had more
money than common sense the money went
to my head
I started to throw rave parties with it
and this is where I started to go beyond
laws now I had people importing ecstasy
from Holland they were smuggling em for
me and I was distributing it so I take
full responsibility for happened on May
16th 2002 will knock on my door bang
bang bang bang bang I jump up from the
computer look up the people it's blacked
out go over to the window marks man
police what vehicles whole apartment
complex is surrounded all right about
let them in hmmm I get halfway to the
door boom the door just flies off the
hinges hands above your heads get on the
ground don't move
it wasn't my brightest idea to be
breaking the law well not only where the
gang members murdering the prisoners
even the garden murdering the prisoners
let's get used to the sounds of heads
getting bashed against toilets bodies
getting thrown around people getting
carried on stretchers it looked like
they were dead Phoenix is the hottest of
the big cities in America gets almost 50
degrees hot all year round way too hot
going our black and white stripe stripe
outfits so everyone's just going around
their underwear
bunch of pink boxes that's to humiliate
the prisoner even so I'm trying to stay
cooling it in your boxes it's like a
concrete oven in there it's like we're
being cooked alive and the building
stays warm all night long and it wreaks
havoc with your skin you start to get
these skin infections and bed sores the
itch and bleed especially on your behind
because you sat around all day one of
the hardest parts for me was just lying
in this pool of sweats at night the
itching is keeping me awake when you're
sweating constantly the outer layers of
your skin start to turn soggy so you get
the itchiness and when you scratch
yourself clumps of your own skin detach
under your nails
yeah I remember one night I fell asleep
on my slide I didn't realize it but my
ear had filled up with sweat I want to
change position the sweat just when I
love my face it was like someone was
touching me just freaked me out and woke
me up you know so we got two meals a day
breakfast came in a plastic bag moldy
bread and green Bologna green Bologna
it's a raw sausage mean gone past its
sell-by date it's got a green shine to
it a lot of the food was in boxes
businesses were throwing away because it
had expired the mold on the bread blue
green sometimes our mold came in these
fantastic psychedelic colors that look
like works of art and we were so hungry
we would scratch them all off the bread
and cause the bed was stale we put it in
water and swill it to get it down
evening meal was a mystery meat slop we
called Red Death it looked like karate
vomit blended with blood of all kinds of
random eaten in its stunk
occasionally there was a dead rat in em
one time we gave a rap back to the
guards we complained and they came back
later in the day and so the jail won't
get any trouble they said it was just a
potato and there wasn't much we could do
boss of the jail one of his favorite
quotes cost us more to feed our police
slugs and our prisoners and our police
dogs are working for a living so my
parents remortgaged the house point was
almost a hundred thousand dollars to get
a lawyer to shine look we can get you
out the jail gold court I have a bail
hearing get your bail reduced I'm
getting all excited yeah finally I'm
getting up to jail
girlfriends excited I'm a local family
shopping court uncle X police officer
speaks on me huh on my behalf it seems
to have gone really well except
prosecutors trying to make her name of
my case she sabotages the hearing the
judge doubles my bail to 1.5 million
cash only
once your bail goes over a million
you're automatically reclassified from
medium secure
see over to maximum security so it's
about 2:00 in the morning when I walk
into my cell it's dark inside but
there's some light coming in from the
day room first thing you notice two
months L that's an improvement but
wondering why my Selma is asleep on the
top bunk because where I come from
people fight over the bottom bunk so I
think something's not quite right so
walking some more I start to sense
movement on the walls and the ceiling I
think my eyes are playing tricks so I
put my face right up to the wall to see
what's going on and it's covered in
these guys I got used to the violence by
now trying to get sleep with these koala
me gave me a nervous breakdown let's get
pollen medication 8:00 at night is
lockdown 10:00 is lights out they know
when the lights are about to go out they
start lining up in the cracks in the
walls in this old building there is
little movement with the antenna
sticking out like an army waiting to
invade as soon as the lights go out
they just flood the room now you got a
choice you wrap a sheet around you so
you look like the mummy
leave a breathing hole it does keep them
off you but the sheet traps the heat to
your body and like I mentioned earlier
you got all these bleeding and itching
skin infections and bed sores
the trap heat makes it so unbearably
itchy you can't possibly sleep so in
there just throwing the sheet off and
letting them crawl on you fortunately
they don't bite they start out tickling
your feet limbs palms of your hands so
this day if anyone took off my hands I
flinch because I woke up so many nights
and tickling my hands they try to get in
your ears to eat your ear wax it's like
honey to them is anyone in here
automatic anyone with asthma okay we'll
check this story out had a neighbor had
a neighbor a maximum security was
asthmatic wakes up one morning out of
breath grabs his inhaler
takes a blast shoots a live cockroach
inside himself starts starts freaking
out saying he can feel it moving around
inside him throws up and his stomach
contents come out but somehow the insect
is stuck inside it won't come out even
the day time there were so many the
prisoners were doing cockroach races
gambling on the winner and first week in
the in the morning that the fellas will
come up their cells with plastic
contains they put peanut butter in to
trap them and that empty all the dead
ones into the into the trashcan Lister's
it didn't matter how many we killed they
own the building now in my first year I
was resenting getting caught I was
pining for my old lifestyle back I was
still attached to material things in the
second year the prosecutor said every
time we spoke about drugs on the phone
carries five to ten years you've got
twenty plus charges if you go over to
trial and lose we're going to stack all
those charges up to a maximum two
hundred year sentence the prospect of
getting a two hundred year sentence
pushed me to the brink of suicidal
insanity I couldn't sleep with the
cockroaches crawling on me I've seen
imaginary insects and hearing voices I
had all these infections and bed sores
at a pink eye infection yellow posters
coming up my high ball I think I can't
take this anymore I'm just going to
slash my wrists and bleed out but I'm
going to do it after a guard does a
security walk now before I was going to
do it I wanted to say goodbye to my
family and friends what I mean by that
is I was allowed seven photos in the
jail so get the photos out my mum dad
girlfriend I'm looking through them and
just like getting really really sad I'm
thinking my mom's going to get a call
saying her son's killed himself in a
foreign jail I just couldn't bear the
thought that just got really sad like
crying and that's what actually saved my
life
but when you're facing 200 years
I actually credit that now with crushing
that material side out of me because
getting sentenced to nine and a half
years with one the happiest days of my
life
I could see when I was going to get my
life back when you're facing 200 years
your million-dollar house and you swing
pill on the mat on the mountain don't
matter you sports Kaiser relevant plasma
screen TV all your gadgets because the
other thing it taught me that my second
lesson was about helping others before
facing 200 years my behavior was selfish
narcissistic had mystic getting high get
my party friends high but became a
turning point in the jail about a third
of the prisoners couldn't read or write
I started to read their legal paperwork
and explain what was going on to them
some of the Mexican prisoners couldn't
write home in Spanish so I started to
help them write home in Spanish to the
loved ones and the other thing after
that I got moved over to the state
prison system then once I got out of the
room and jail and the guards put me in
with this guy on the Left he's a serial
home invader torturer he was breaking
into people houses and taking hammers to
their kneecaps his welcoming statement
to me I've got a padlock in a sock I
could smash your brains in while you
sleep I can kill you another one really
nice guy he knew my family was flying
over to visit me for Christmas so he got
his mate this guy on the right this
20-strong California biker to attack me
just when my parents had flown over to
visit me then it didn't end up very well
for me at all let's put it that way
I got smashed I got moved out of that
cell and my new cell mate introduced me
to a guy he thought could protect me his
name was to townies
it was a mafia mass murderer serving 141
years it left the dead bodies of rival
gangsters from Arizona to Alaska now
because he only murdered rival gangsters
he was at the top of the respect in the
prison so once he took me on his wing I
never got smashed again he was looking
for someone to write his life story
called me as official biographer so I
was going to sneak in his cell every day
and the people who came in to pay
respect to him that respect sizes row
buff on me now - tony was a big reader
he introduced me to John Updike Norman
Mailer Tom Wolfe it comes into my cell
one day of a book one of his favorites
so Shawn you got to read this it was a
day in the life of Ivan Denisovich by
Alexander Solzhenitsyn so Ivan's in the
Russian gulag under the Stalin era the
working these guys to death in the
freezing cold if you refuse to work you
dragged to death by horseback or you
thrown off a cliff so whenever the
prisoners complained about anything
where we was that to Tony's would laugh
at them and say hey this is how bad Ivan
had it for example if the prisoners
complained about the breakfast being
called in the morning
- Tony's would say where Ivan was at
they were fighting over a fish eyeball
in the soup so to Tony's learnt me to
appreciate the small things
now I also my guardian angel in there
was a therapist called dr. o and he knew
I was on this reading program when I was
facing 200 years I pledge to read as
many books as possible and I managed to
read over a thousand books in just over
six years I read a lot of the original
texts in philosophy in psychology and
they helped me go deep inside myself and
address the root causes of why I got
involved in drugs and crime so the
therapist said that's well and good
you're reading this stuff but how can
you apply this to your life come up with
some quotes from these books and bring
them to me and we'll discuss them so I'd
like to share three of those with you
first one is Nietzsche live your life
like a work of art look at how much
effort people put into a work of art if
you put that much effort into your life
how much the quality
your life would improve another one is
Marcus Aurelius and this applies it's
helpful for prisoners because they're in
chaotic situations but we all go through
rough things on the road of life you
know loss of a loved one end up in a
relationship breakup you think you never
going to get anyone to love you again
lose your job think you're never going
to be able to pay your bills stuff like
that but Marcus Aurelius the quote is
that chaos you can put it to the ocean
with the waves lashing against the
promenade and you're like the promenade
remaining strong when those waves are
crashing down maintaining equanimity
the third one is epictetus we're
disturbed not by things but by the views
that we take of them I'll give you an
example this imprison people are calling
each other names all day long and the
people who get picked on the most of the
ones we react the most but according to
epictetus we can choose our reaction
doesn't matter what people say we can
choose it through our forts so from
facing 200 years and from to Tonys I
appreciate the small things now to
tony's died from liver cancer meson drug
taking in 2010 but in a sense the spirit
of him lives on in me I wake up with a
smile on my face now there's no dead
rats in my food anymore
there's no cockroaches in my bed I'm
free I'm in the West were things I got
you know so good when there's always
horrible stuff going on around the world
and I my biggest lesson was to learn
that happiness is in your heart and you
know what your thought to make it thank
you
I mean smoking okay